---
layout: default
title: "On Speaking and Non-Speaking"
slug: speaking
category: musing
tags: neuro speaking social
---

It's more complicated than that.

Well, what isn't? Not helpful to say it that way.

I'm doing my best here to write it how I'd say it, to not clean everything up
behind a nice pretty mask for whatever allists might happen across my stuff.
Might pull it off. Might not.

In short: words are hard. I'm lucky (?) enough to almost always be able to
manage it – with a stammer, sometimes, or slowly and with long pauses, spinning
a finger, measuring every word twice and getting them wrong regardless – but
I'm not *silent*, and that's better than some get.

But when all's said and done, I haven't said what I meant. Often, if it's a
particular kind of *personal-important*, I *can't* say what I meant. The words
are in my head and they won't go out my mouth, and I don't have any other words
to say, and *then* I'm plainly nonspeaking. But that's rare, because it's
as-much-or-more about the topic as it is about my stress, and so most of the
time I wouldn't be talking about it if I could.

It helps to be asked about it. In the same way that it's much easier to start
doing something if it's an outside deadline than if it isn't, it's a bit easier
to get the words out if someone else is asking than not.

Well, no, that's not quite it. It's easier to say *something* but most of the
time that's the reflex before the real. "How are you?" "Fine." That doesn't
take thought, and every time I've thought about it, it never went well. Even
when the person asking is someone who ~probably~ cares, they're most likely
just talking-to-talk and wouldn't respond well if I told them. Or maybe I'm
wrong, this time – maybe I've even been wrong some previous times? But by the
time I wish I'd said something different, I've already read my line off the
script and the conversation's moved on or (more likely) ended entirely.

"Words are hard". Doesn't sound like much, does it? I say it out loud, and
judging from the chuckles, it sounds like a joke, right? Oh, it can't be that
bad; oh, it's "just" talking; oh, but you're *smart*, it can't *possibly* be as
much of an issue as you're making it out to be.

**You try it.**
